---
layout: post
title:  "Book summary – Building Secure and Reliable Systems: Chapter 2"
date:   2020-04-19 12:00:00 +0300
tags:   google-srs book-summary
---

### Chapter 2: Understanding Adversaries

_Security adversaries_ are human,
you can expect them to have some sort of **motivation** for their actions.
Understanding your adversaries lets you prepare a better response for them.
Some examples of motivation:
private _fun_;
community _fame_;
public _activism_;
financial _gain_;
_coercion_ or _manipulation_ for goals;
covert _espionage_;
or plain _destruction_.
Keep in mind what can attract attackers to you.

It is also useful to consider **profiles** of possible attackers
which affect their _modus operandi_.

- **Hobbyists** are mostly harmless and just curious, rarely criminal.

- **Vulnerability researchers** often work for hire and have standards of behavior.

- **Governments** have access to vast resources and have strong interests.

  Governments have institutional experience in gathering intelligence.
  They also sometimes engage in military activities, information warfare.
  Another common thing is policing domestic activity as they see fit.

  Carefully consider if you can realistically be a target of nation-sized adversaries,
  and whether you have and willing to use adequate resources for counter.
  Keep in mind that attacks might be indirect, come from unexpected angle,
  and be very persistent.

- **Activists** have a message to deliver and can/will be loud for that sake.
  They might have strong feelings but not always relevant experience,
  so it can be hard to predict their actions.
  Be aware of controversies that might attract them.

- **Criminals** are a diverse bunch but often _opportunistic_:
  that is, they might turn to someone else if you seem to be not worth the hassle.
  Also note that they are usually skilled at manipulating individual people.

- **AI** can come as a surprise with their bizzare logic, sheer volume, and persistence.
  While they are hardly common, AI threats might become possible in near future.
  It is a good idea to be ready to provide a matching automatic response.

Organizations always have **insiders** who are trusted with internal access.
Insiders are a risk, whether they make honest mistakes, turn onto you,
or are exploited by a third-party attacker for leverage.
Insiders can be split into three groups:

- **First-parties** like employees, interns, executives, board members.
- **Third-party** contributors, vendors, contractors, partners.
- **Related** individuals such as friends, family, roommates of the above.

_First-parties_ usually have the biggest possible impact on security and reliability,
given their direct access capabilities and the fact that everyone has them.
_Third-parties_ are becoming increasingly common attack vector
in the days of open-source libraries, public APIs, global economy, etc.
They might come from an unexpected angle.
_Related_ insiders are often implicitly trusted and neglected,
thus sometimes becoming an easily accessible target.

There are many **frameworks** that model insider risks.
The book suggests a simple one, in a form suitable for a card game.
(Mion’s club will be delighted at this whodunnit!)

| Actor/Roles | Motives     | Actions      | Targets        |
| ----------- | ----------- | ------------ | -------------- |
| Engineering | Accident    | Data access  | User data      |
| Operations  | Negligence  | Exfiltration | Source code    |
| Sales       | Compromise  | Deletion     | Documents      |
| Legal       | Financial   | Modification | Logs           |
| Marketing   | Ideological | Injection    | Infrastructure |
| Executives  | Retaliatory | Press leak   | Services       |
|             | Vanity      |              | Financials     |

Pick an actor with their target and motives explaining their actions.
You can combine them as ridiculous as you like for brainstorming sessions.
For example, _Legal Contractor_ is entrusted with _Source Code_ for license audit,
but they happen to be _Negligent_ and eventually _Leak to Press_,
revealing common vulnerabilities and politically incorrect jokes in comments,
which trigger _Activists_...

Sometimes people just make **mistakes**.
Insiders can make the most grave mistakes with the most impact on the business.
Eventually someone somewhere _will_ make a mistake.
Design your systems to take that into account.
Anyone having access to data or capabilities might be an attacker,
their proxy, or can make a mistake.
Some helpful principles for mitigating mistakes:

- **Least privilege** limits impact, both in scope _and_ time.
- **Zero trust** prevents direct unrestricted human access to systems.
- **Multiparty authorization** avoids single point of trust, counters “lone wolfs”.
- **Business justification** could be formally documented on each access.
- **Audit and detection** by reviewing and vetting access logs and justifications.
- **Recoverability** is helpful in case destruction happens.

In order to protect your systems in an informed manner,
you shoud be aware of **methods** used by attackers.
There are many frameworks for that too,
providing systematic view on methods and behaviors.
However, note that variations are common:
no two attacks or attackers are the same.

**Threat intelligence** increases awareness of attacks happening in the wild.
It is provided or published by security agencies in many forms,
such as _written reports_ on indivial attacks,
_indicators of compromise_ (IOC) useful for automatic detection,
_malware reports_ often used for cross-correlation of unrelated attacks.
All of this gives you a perspective on what attacks are popular,
which are effective in your industry, etc.

**Cyber Kill Chains** are adaptation of a military idea to describe steps used by attacker.
Typically they include _reconnaisance_ for weak points,
_entry_ to gain access,
_lateral movement_ to widen the access,
_persistence_ to cement the acquired access level,
followed by _goal execution_.

**Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures** (TTP) is a methodology
for categorization of attackers’ _modus operandi_.
MITRE’s ATT&CK matrix, for example, lays out hundreds of possible approaches to each attack step.

Understanding attackers is nuanced activity
but it is essential for proper **risk assessment**.
Here are some common _cognitive biases_ to avoid:

- You may not realize that you are a target.
  Even if you are small and uninteresting, your customers and associates might not be.
- Unsophisticated attacks might be widely successful.
  Especially when they have been dismissed in favor of protection against more exotic threats.
- Don’t underestimate your adversaries.
  While most of them might not be extremely motivated,
  outliers may go through great lengths with what are acceptable costs.
- Attacks might be hard to attribute to a specific entity.
  Focus on observable TTPs rather that prioritizing identification of attackers.
  Deception is a thing.
- Not everybody is afraid of getting caught.
  Especially if they act via Internet from another country,
  knowing that they won’t be extradited for prosecution.
